


Internet Engineering Task Force                              A. Pandey
Internet-Draft                                       considerate.io
Intended status: Informational
Expires: 27 February 2027                                26 August 2026


              The Considerate Protocol: Capacity-Aware
                    Rate Limiting for Web Agents
                     draft-pandey-considerate-00

Abstract

   This document describes the Considerate Protocol, a lightweight
   mechanism by which an HTTP origin server may declare its request-
   handling capacity to automated clients ("agents"), and by which an
   agent identifies itself and commits to a documented set of runtime
   behaviors (adaptive rate control, and a full stop on sustained
   failure) in response.  The protocol is designed to compose with,
   not replace, the Robots Exclusion Protocol [RFC9309], and to serve
   as a low-barrier floor beneath heavier-weight mechanisms such as
   cryptographic bot authentication, for the large population of
   origins that cannot adopt those mechanisms today.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  This is a draft submitted for publication as an
   Independent Submission and does not represent the consensus of any
   IETF working group.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
   documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts
   as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in
   progress."

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2026 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction
   2.  Terminology
   3.  The Agent Identity Header
     3.1.  Grammar
     3.2.  Required Agent Behavior
   4.  The Site Policy Resource
     4.1.  Discovery and Caching
     4.2.  Field Reference
   5.  Fallback Capacity Inference
   6.  Security Considerations
   7.  Privacy Considerations
   8.  IANA Considerations
   9.  Relationship to Other Work
   10. References
     10.1. Normative References
     10.2. Informative References
   Appendix A.  Change Log
   Author's Address

1.  Introduction

   [RFC9309] answers "which resources may an automated client
   retrieve."  It does not answer "at what rate," and the ad hoc
   Crawl-delay extension that some origins use to approximate an
   answer is unauthenticated, unauthorized by this specification,
   inconsistently implemented, and static -- it cannot express "here
   is a higher rate for an agent I recognize" or react to observed
   degradation.

   This gap matters in proportion to the growth of automated,
   goal-directed HTTP clients ("agents") driven by large language
   models, which are frequently given open-ended tasks ("retrieve
   these N documents") without an operator in the loop reasoning
   about the target's capacity the way a human author of a scraper
   conventionally would.

   This document specifies two complementary mechanisms:

   *  An HTTP request header (Section 3) by which an agent identifies
      itself, and a normative behavioral contract for how a compliant
      agent MUST react to standard HTTP signals indicating server
      distress.

   *  A JSON resource (Section 4) by which an origin MAY declare an
      explicit rate ceiling, optionally varying by agent identity and
      by time of day, requiring no cryptography and no dependency on a
      third-party service.

   Neither mechanism requires the other to be useful in isolation.

2.  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY",
   and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described
   in BCP 14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in
   all capitals, as shown here.

   Origin, agent, and other HTTP terms are used as defined in
   [RFC9110].

3.  The Agent Identity Header

   A compliant agent SHOULD include the following request header on
   every request:

      Considerate-Agent: name="MyResearchBot", version="1.0",
                          intent="bulk-scrape",
                          contact="mailto:ops@example.com"

3.1.  Grammar

   The header value is a Dictionary as defined by Structured Field
   Values for HTTP [RFC8941], restricted in practice to string-valued
   members; this specification does not currently define any use for
   Inner Lists or Parameters within it.

   name (required):  A stable identifier for the agent.  Origins
      match this value against the "agents" map of Section 4; it
      SHOULD remain constant across versions of the same agent.

   version (optional):  A free-form version string.

   intent (optional):  One of "browse", "bulk-scrape", "monitor",
      "research", or an unregistered extension value.  Purely
      informational.

   contact (recommended):  A "mailto:" or "https:" URI at which a
      human responsible for the agent's traffic can be reached.

   This self-declared identity is a courtesy, not an authentication
   mechanism; see Section 6 and Section 9's discussion of Web Bot Auth
   for a complementary mechanism providing a stronger guarantee.

3.2.  Required Agent Behavior

   Sending the header without implementing this subsection is not
   compliant with this specification, and produces a false impression
   of good-faith behavior.  A compliant agent:

   *  MUST treat a 429 (Too Many Requests) or 503 (Service
      Unavailable) response ([RFC9110] Section 15.5.5, 15.6.4), or a
      sustained increase in response latency, as an immediate signal
      to at least halve its request rate to the origin.

   *  MUST honor a Retry-After response header field ([RFC9110]
      Section 10.2.3) as a floor on its next request to the origin,
      not merely as a suggestion.

   *  MUST, after a small number of consecutive failures or a
      sustained high error rate, stop sending requests to the origin
      entirely -- distinct from, and in addition to, reducing its
      rate -- until a single successful probe request confirms
      recovery.

   *  MUST NOT retry a failed request into an origin currently in the
      stopped state described above.

4.  The Site Policy Resource

   An origin MAY publish a JSON resource at the well-known URI
   "/.well-known/considerate.json" [RFC8615].

4.1.  Discovery and Caching

   An agent fetches this resource via GET over HTTPS at most once per
   origin per caching interval (24 hours is RECOMMENDED absent other
   guidance), falling back to HTTP only when HTTPS is unavailable.
   This fetch is exempt from the rate control described in Section 3,
   being comparable in cost and frequency to an agent's existing
   practice of fetching "/robots.txt".

   A missing resource, or a non-2xx response retrieving it, MUST be
   treated identically to an origin that has not published a policy
   (Section 5 then applies) and MUST NOT be treated as an error
   condition by the agent.

   Malformed JSON, or JSON not matching an Object at the top level,
   MUST be treated identically to a missing resource.  Unrecognized
   member names MUST be ignored, to preserve forward compatibility.

4.2.  Field Reference

   version:  A string identifying the schema version this document
      targets.

   contact:  A "mailto:" or "https:" URI for the origin operator.

   default:  A Rate Rule (below) applied to a request that omits the
      header in Section 3, or that supplies a "name" absent from
      "agents".

   agents:  A map from a "name" value (Section 3.1) to a Rate Rule
      overriding "default" for that agent specifically.  A member
      keyed "*" applies to any request that supplies an identity not
      otherwise matched, distinct from "default".

   disallow_paths:  An array of path prefixes, checked in addition to
      (not in place of) "Disallow" directives in "/robots.txt"
      [RFC9309].

   crawl_windows:  An array of time-based rate multipliers, each an
      object with optional "days" (an array drawn from the set {mon,
      tue, wed, thu, fri, sat, sun}), optional "hours" (a string of
      the form "HH:MM-HH:MM", interpreted in UTC and permitted to
      span midnight), and "multiplier" (a number greater than zero).
      When multiple windows are simultaneously active, the largest
      applicable multiplier applies.

   A Rate Rule is an object with the following optional members:
   "requests_per_second" (a number greater than zero), "max_concurrent"
   (an integer no less than one), "burst" (an integer no less than
   one), and "tier" (one of "fragile", "standard", or "robust", an
   alternative to specifying "requests_per_second" directly).

   An agent MUST NOT exceed an explicitly declared
   "requests_per_second" -- the adaptive behavior of Section 3.2 MAY
   reduce the effective rate below this ceiling but MUST NOT be used
   to justify exceeding it.

5.  Fallback Capacity Inference

   In the absence of both a Section 4 resource and a "Crawl-delay"
   directive applicable under [RFC9309], an agent MAY infer a starting
   capacity tier from signals already available on the request it was
   going to make regardless, without issuing dedicated probe traffic:
   the presence of response header fields associated with a content
   delivery network SHOULD be treated as evidence of a "robust"
   origin; the absence of such evidence combined with a
   time-to-first-byte exceeding approximately 800 milliseconds SHOULD
   be treated as evidence of a "fragile" one.

   A tier inferred under this section is a starting point that an
   agent's adaptive rate control (Section 3.2) MAY subsequently
   increase; it is advisory, unlike the binding ceiling of Section 4.2.

6.  Security Considerations

   The identity declared in Section 3 is unauthenticated; an origin
   MUST NOT rely on it for access control, and SHOULD treat any rate
   privilege extended to a named agent as revocable and abusable by
   an impersonator.  Origins requiring a verified identity SHOULD
   combine this specification with a cryptographic mechanism such as
   Web Bot Auth (Section 9).

   An agent parsing the resource of Section 4 is parsing content
   supplied by a remote, potentially adversarial party, and SHOULD
   apply ordinary defensive parsing practice: a bound on response
   size, a parser that fails closed to "no policy" on any malformed
   input rather than raising an exception into the agent's control
   flow, and no execution of any content the resource might contain.

7.  Privacy Considerations

   The "contact" field of Section 3.1, if populated with a real
   operator's personal email address rather than a role account, is
   disclosed to every origin the agent contacts.  Implementations
   SHOULD document this to their operators and MAY default to a role
   or team address.

   A future extension enabling shared capacity information across
   agents (see Section 9) would introduce additional privacy
   considerations -- specifically, the risk of an origin using such a
   registry to fingerprint or correlate distinct agents -- and is
   explicitly out of scope for this document pending further design
   attention.

8.  IANA Considerations

   This document requests registration of "Considerate-Agent" in the
   "Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) Field Name Registry"
   maintained at <https://www.iana.org/assignments/http-fields>, and
   registration of "considerate.json" in the "Well-Known URIs"
   registry maintained under [RFC8615], pending working-group or
   community review of this document.

9.  Relationship to Other Work

   This document is scoped narrowly and is intended to be adopted
   alongside, not in place of, the following:

   *  [RFC9309] and its "Crawl-delay" extension, for scope and a
      static per-crawler delay; this document treats "Crawl-delay" as
      one input to Section 5 and always honors "Disallow" first.

   *  The IETF AI Preferences vocabulary (draft-ietf-aipref-vocab),
      which expresses permission to use content for training or
      search, a distinct question from the capacity question this
      document addresses.

   *  Web Bot Auth (draft-meunier-webbotauth-registry), which provides
      cryptographically verified agent identity; this document is
      intended as an adoptable floor beneath that heavier mechanism,
      not a competitor to it.

10.  References

10.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, May 2017.

   [RFC8615]  Nottingham, M., "Well-Known Uniform Resource Identifiers
              (URIs)", RFC 8615, May 2019.

   [RFC8941]  Nottingham, M. and P-H. Kamp, "Structured Field Values
              for HTTP", RFC 8941, February 2021.

   [RFC9110]  Fielding, R., Ed., Nottingham, M., Ed., and J. Reschke,
              Ed., "HTTP Semantics", STD 97, RFC 9110, June 2022.

   [RFC9309]  Koster, M., Illyes, G., Zeller, H., and L. Sassman,
              "Robots Exclusion Protocol", RFC 9309, September 2022.

10.2.  Informative References

   [draft-ietf-aipref-vocab]
              IETF AI Preferences Working Group, "Vocabulary for
              expressing AI training and other preferences", Work in
              Progress.

   [draft-meunier-webbotauth-registry]
              Meunier, T., et al., "Registry and Signature Agent card
              for Web bot auth", Work in Progress.

Appendix A.  Change Log

   This appendix to be removed by the RFC Editor before publication,
   if applicable.

   draft-pandey-considerate-00 (2026-08-26): Initial submission,
   derived from the "considerate" reference implementation's SPEC.md
   v0.2 <https://github.com/AdityaPandey0901/considerate/blob/main/SPEC.md>.

Author's Address

   Aditya Pandey
   Email: (see GitHub profile)
   URI:   https://github.com/AdityaPandey0901/considerate
